# Bandwidth utilization

## Multiplexing

**Multiplexing** is a set of techniques that allows the simultaneous
transmission of multiple signals across a single data link. In a multiplexing
system, $n$ channels share the bandwidth of one link. The lord **channel**
refers to the portion of a link that carries a transmission between a given
sender-receiver pair. One link can have many channels.

### FDM

In *frequency division multiplexing (FDM)*, signals generated by each sending
device modulate different carriers. This modulated signals are then combined
into a single composite signal that can be sent by the link. Channels can be
separated by strips of unused bandwidth-guard bands to prevent signal from
overlapping.

Each source generates a signal of a similar frequency range. These similar
signals modulate different carriers (with different frequencies $f_1$, $f_2$,
and $f_3$), The resulting modulated signals are then combined into a single
composite signal that is sent over a link.

#### Demultiplexing FDM

The demultiplexer uses a series of filters to decompose the multiplexed signals
into its constituent component signals. The individual signals are then passed
to a demodulator that separates the input signals from their carriers and passes
them to the output lines.

Telephone companies have traditionally multiplexed signals from lower-bandwidth
lines onto higher-bandwidth lines.

| Analog multiplexing hierarchy | Classification |
| --- | --- |
| 12 voice channels | Group |
| 5 groups | Supergroup |
| 10 supergroups | Master group |
| 6 master groups | Jumbo group |

### TDM

**Time division multiplexing (TDM)** is a digital process that allows several
connections to share the high bandwidth of a link. INstead of sharing a portion
of the bandwidth as in FDM, **time is shared**. Each connection occupies a
portion of time in the link.

#### Synchronous TDM

In **synchronous TDM**, data units from each input connection are combined into
a frame. If we have in connections, a frame is divided into $n$ time slots and
one slot is allocated into each unit, one for each input line.

The data rate of the output link must be in $n$ times higher than the data rate
of a single input link to guarantee the flow of data.

TDM can be visualized as two fast-rotating switches, one on the multiplexing
side and the other on the de-multiplexing side. And the switch is
**unsynchronized** and rotate at the same speed but in positive direction.

| Side | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Multiplexing | As the switch open in front of a connection, this connection can send a unit of data onto the link. This process is called interleaving. |
| De-multiplexing | As the switch open, the connection can receive a unit of data from the link. |

If a source does not have data to send, the corresponding slot in the output
frame is empty.

### Multilevel multiplexing

**Multilevel multiplexing** is a technique used when the data rate of an input
line is a multiple of others.

### Multiple-slot allocation

We can allocate more than 1 slot in a frame to a single input line.

### Pulse stuffing

If bit rate of sources are not multiple integers of each other, we can make the
highest input data rate the dominant data rate and then add dummy bits to the
input lines with lower rates. This technique is called pulse stuffing, bit
padding, or **bit stuffing**.

If the multiplexer and the de-multiplexer are not synchronized, a bit belonging
to one channel may be received by the wrong channel. For this reason, one or
more synchronization bits are usually added to each frame.

### Digital hierarchy

Telephone companies implement TDM through a hierarchy of digital signals called
digital signal (DS) service of digital hierarchy.

| Service | Description | Equation |
| --- | --- | --- |
| DS-0 | Single digital channel of $64$ Kbps. | $(2.400) . 8 \textsf{ bit} = 64,000 \sf\ bps$ |
| DS-1 | $1,544$ Mbps source. | $$1,544 \textsf{ Mbps} = \underbrace{24 . 64 \textsf{ Kbps}}_\textsf{phone channels} + \underbrace{8 \textsf{ Kbps}}_\textsf{overhead}$$ |
| DS-2 | $6,312$ Mbps source. | $6,312 \textsf{ Mbps} = 96 . 64 \textsf{ Kbps} + 168 \textsf{ Kbps}$ |
| DS-3 | $44,376$ Mbps source. | $44,376 \textsf{ Mbps} = 672 . 64 \textsf{ Kbps} + 1,368 \textsf{ Kbps}$ |
| DS-4 | $274,176$ Mbps source. | $274,176 \textsf{ Mbps} = 4,032 . 64 \textsf{ Kbps} + 16,128 \textsf{ Kbps}$ |

### T line

The telephone companies use T-lines to implement the DS services.

$$
\begin{array}{rcl}
  24.8 + 1 & = & 193 \sf\ bits \\\\
  1,544 \sf\ Mbps & = & 24 . 64 \textsf{ Kbps} + 8 \textsf{ Kbps}
\end{array}
$$

E-lines are used in Europe.

### Statistical TDM

In statistical time-division multiplexing, slots are dynamically allocated to
improve bandwidth efficiency. Only when an input line has data to send, it is
given a slot in an output frame. The number of slots in each frame is less than
the number of input lines.

In statistical multiplexing, there is no fixed relationship between the inputs
and outputs. We need to include the address of the receiver inside each slot.

## Spread spectrum

Spread spectrum is designed to be used in wireless applications. Stations must
be able to spare the medium without interception by an eavesdropper and without
being subject to jamming from a malicious intruder.

Spread spectrum techniques spread the original spectrum needed for each station.
The expanded bandwidth allows the service to leap its message in a **protective
envelope** for a more secure transmission.

### FHSS

The **frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS)** technique uses $m$ different
carrier frequencies that are modulated by the source signal. At one moment the
signal modulates one carrier frequency, at the next moment the signal modulates
another carrier frequency.

A **pseudorandom code generator** creates a $k$-bit pattern for every hopping
period $T_m$. The frequency table uses the pattern to find the frequency to be
used for this hopping period and passes it to the frequency synthesizer. The
frequency synthesizer creates a carrier signal of that frequency and the source
signal modulates the carrier signal.

If the number of hopping frequencies is $m$, we can multiplex $m$ channels by
using the same $B_{SS}$ bandwidth. This is possitive because a station uses just
one frequency in each hopping period. $m-1$ other frequencies can be used by
other $m-1$ stations.
